# Outline: The "Rules" of Snow Drifting
<div>
## Introduction
  <p>1. Fixed snowdrifts are abundant in tundra, alpine, prairie, and high latitude environments all over the world. The ecological,physical and practical importance of snowdrifts is remarkable: they provide the ecosystem services of water storage and habitat for sub-nivean life; they physically alter the landscape beneath them and drive spring runoff; they bury infrastructure and precipitate avalanches. We define a fixed snowdrift as a deposit of windblown snow located in the lee of some upwind topographic inflection point or obstacle that substaintally deeper than the surrounding undrifted snow. The term 'fixed' distinguishes such snowdrifts from dynamic snow bedforms such as snow waves and barchans (see Filhol and Sturm, 2017). For the sake of brevity we will refer to fixed snowdrifts as simply 'drifts' from here forward.</p>
  <p>2. Despite the ubiquity and importance of drifts there have been very few (< 10) studies of drifts in Nature. The sparsity of studies is in part explained by the practical difficulties of measuring drifts caused by there inherent properties. Drifts occur in cold and windy locations where field measurements are challenging. The driving force of the wind fragments and compacts individual snow grains into a deposit that quickly sinters into a deep, dense, and hard deposit of snow which could require an axe or even a chainsaw to cut away. Drifts are fleeting. They grow in bursts each winter only to dissapear (save perennial snow patches) in the spring, so timing is also important to measuring drifts in Nature. Finally, drift measurements, like most field measurements of snow, are destructive.</p>
  <p>3. The consequence of limited drift measurements and literature is that we do not know the "rules" that drifts follow. Are there truly different classes of drifts? How do upwind and downwind slopes determine the ultimate drift profile? How does obliqueness to the wind change a drift? How similar are drifts across several winters? What geometries best characterize drifts?</p>
  <p>4. In this paper we examine (N x 100) drifts using snow depth maps derived from airborne structure-from-motion (SfM) photogrammetry and  airborne lidar and seek their rules. Our dataset represents a (20x) improvement in the set of measured drifts in Nature.</p>
</div>
<div>
## Background
<p>  1.Cornish --> Matthews --> Lewis and nivation
   Although studies with measurements of drifts are few and far between, drifts have drawn the eye of explorers and scientists for well over a century. Drift science is rooted in the exploration of the frontier country of North America. Francois Matthes' description of hillsope snowdrifts and suggestion that they develop in much the same way each winter is the basis not only presage this and a number of other snowdrift studies, but also created the science of nivation in the Bighorn Mountains of Wyoming are the basis of drift science.</p>
   <p>Soon after Matthes was describing snowdrifts and their action upon the landscape in Wyoming a British geographer, Vaughan Cornish, was cataloging the drifts he saw while traveling across Canada. Traveling by train, Cornish noticed drift after drift in the lee of fences and hedges. He suggested a fundamental curve and form for drifts: blunt at the windward end and tapering to a point at the lee end. He also suggested this fundamental shape was also the shape of the eddy space in the wind created by the upwind drift trigger: a break in slope or obstacle. Cornish split the drifts he observed into two categories: complete and incomplete. Complete drifts are smooth in profile and lack the cliff or cornice which often marks the leeward end of an incomplete drifts.</p>
   <p>Other geographic expeditions produced classifications of drifts, but sorted them by the terrain they occupied rather than by their fullness (i.e. amount of flux captured) as Cornish did. One such set of observations has an extraordinary origin with the infamous Crocker Land Expedition of 1913-1917. The objective of the expedition was to confirm or deny the existence of Crocker Land, a landmass proposed to be somewhere Northwest of Ellesmere Island. The expedition's biologist, W.E. Ekblaw, suffered frostbite and was forced to return the basecamp at Etah, Greenland. It was here that he was struck by the lingering presence of snowdrifts throughout the summer and sought to classify what he saw by the type of topography they occupied: 'dome' drifts formed on the uneven surfaces atop high plateaus, piedmont drifts formed at the foot of cliffs, and wedges drifts filled in gorges and gullies. A British expedition to Iceland produced a trio of drift forms similar to their Greenlandic counterparts: transverse, longitudinal, and circular, the latter of which were interpreted as precursors to glacial cirques. During this era the Russian scientists confronted more practical drfit problems on their railroads and also created topographic (catchement?) classifications (Rikhter, 1937). These terrain-driven classification schemes were thought to have genetic importance: the type of terrain determines the type of drift and spurred on the relatively new field of nivation coined by Matthes a few decades earlier.</p>
   <p>2.  From these early observations we can create a framework for thinking about drifts where they are controlled by two things: 1) the landscape, and 2) the amount of windblown flux available. Beyond these two points, there is little more in the literature because of an odd bifurcation in studies of blowing snow: in one direction are practical experiments using wind tunnels (perhaps driven by the rapid increase in roads and railrawys in environments ripe for drifting), in another are models of blowing snow. [OR is the bifurcation between tunnell/modeling and nivation? (e.g. Nivation guys...e.g. tunnell & modeling guys)] Left behind, with a few exceptions, are actual observations of drifts in Nature.</p>
   <p>
   3. After the splintering of drift science into nivation, simulation, and wind tunnell experimentation, it is nearly 40 years until more seminal snowdrift study is performed. Ronald Tabler measured 17 snowdrift and topographic profiles in Wyoming and creates the first set of rules for snowdrifts. In contrast with the results of previous wind tunnel experimentation that found slopes shallower than 14 degrees did not nucleate drifts (Finney, 1937 CHECK this is the terrain slope, not the snow surface slope), Tabler found drifts on mild slopes, as little as 10 degrees. He used his observations to develop an empirical regression which predicts the slope of a drift surface based on a combination of upwind and downwind slopes, and this regression is still at the core of spatial models of blowing snow. Tabler coins the term 'equilibirium profile' to describe the predicted drift surface profiles, meaning that the drifts have essentially filled in to the point where they no longer create an eddy in the mass of windblown snow - a description remarkably similar to Cornish's completeness criterion over 70 years prior! Tabler's work keys us in to the idea that we can predict something about a drift (e.g. the surface slope of the drift when it is full of snow to capacity) based on the terrain below. However, his N is relativey small (17) and his measurements were not repeated (Tabler 1975).
   </p>
  4. Benson
  5. The theme of distinguishing drifts by is expanded by Benson and Sturm (1993) when they identify drifts as nonfilling or filling (an obvious similarity to the Tabler's equilibirium and Cornish's completeness criteria). However, in their study there is no transition between the two types, and the distinction is essentially one of catchement size, i.e. there are catchements which will nearly always fill with a drift by the end of the winter, and there are some that are so large that they will never fill with a drift in even the snowiest and windiest winter. Measurements of nonfilling drifts are used to estimate the totwal winter windblown flux of snow. [How many drifts from sturm and benson]
  6. So we know: terrain matters, flux matters, you can predict something...and drifts tell you about the winter weather.
</div>

## Methods and Field Area
  ### 1. Data and acquisition
  Our drift dataset is comprised of snow depth maps from three distinct Arctuc tundra domains collected via airborne lidar and and airborne structure-from-motion photogrammetry.
  #### Domain 1: Cold Processes Experiment (CLPX) site
  The CLPX swath is an approximately 120 km**2 area on the North Slope of Alaska lying adjacent to the northern foothills of the brooks range. The terrain in this area includes portions of the Kuparuk and Sag watersheds and includes two different wind regimes: relative shelter on the Kuparuk side near Imanvait Creek; and foreful katabics further East and North toward the Sag. The northern boundary of the swath parallels the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System and Dalton Highway. The tundra snowcover in this area is underlain by ___ _____. Airborne lidar acquired twice in 2012 (peak accumulation and snow-free, prior to leaft out) and once in 2013 (peak accumulation). Peak accumulation SfM was acquired in 2015, 2016, 2017, and snow-free SfM was retreived in 2017.
  #### Domain 2: Happy Valley
  #### Domain 3: Trail Valley Creek (TVC) ?
  ### 2. Analysis with toolbox and code
  #### Step 1: Raster Creation and Validation
  #### Step 2: Weather Analysis
  #### Step 3: A novel toolbox for pattern similarity
  #### Step 4: Drift metrics
  #### Step 5: A landscape parameterization of snow depth
  ### 3. Relation of classic cross-section view and map view.

  ## Results

  ## 
